Today is March the 5th, 1990. This will be an
interview with Dr. Lawrence Wolkin, professor at
Texas A&M University, an interview recorded in
his home.
Dr. Wolkin, I understand that the first week in
June of 1989, you had the opportunity to be in
China. And those of us in the United States were
watching what was developing in Tiananmen
Square. Could you share with us what you were doing
in China at that time? I had gone over there. I got
there on Monday, the 29th of May, and was going to be
there for two weeks to participate in some
conferences that were going on in Beijing.
Actually, the conference for the second week had
already been canceled because of these student
demonstrations, but they were going to go ahead
with the conference during the first week, which
was focusing on Americans doing business in China
and some of the problems I might run into, designed
mainly for businessmen who wanted to meet their
counterparts in China so they could start doing
some negotiations for some joint ventures or
buying and selling the products. Because I had to
get my ticket early, I couldn't change the time on
it, so I was going to be there for two weeks anyway.
So I figured that second week, instead of going to
the conference, I would spend some time visiting
with my friends and trying to, as best I could,
determine how much change had taken place in China
since we were there in 85, 86. And during that
second week, my two older children were going to
come over and practice their Chinese and visit
with some of their friends and see some of the
places that they come out when we were there in
Beijing.
How long before this particular event did you make
your plans? Did you know? It was early in the spring
in March when I had gotten permission from the
university to go over there and have gotten some
funding from a couple of the centers there at the
university to attend these meetings and conduct
some more research there in China. But as the
demonstrations were going on, of course, I was
keeping as close in contact with the people that I
knew in China and with people that I knew here
having them help me interpret the events that were
going on as they were watching them on television
as to whether or not it would be safe to go over
there. So it was over a month and a half time period
there. We were watching the news very closely and
trying to determine what the situation really was
in China and if it really posed any threat to
foreigners. Okay. Well, it sounds like you were in
a position to have some inside knowledge with
these other people. You've mentioned being there
in the school year of 1985, 86? Yes. In
what situation, what basis were you there? I was
there to teach at a university there in Beijing,
the University of International Business and
Economics. each year bring in several foreign
experts from different parts of the world. Some of
them there are there to help with English language
for the students at the university, but I was there
to teach Western economics, international
trade, international finance, because the
students at this university would be assigned
after graduation to major corporations in China
that are involved in international trade. They'd
be assigned into the Ministry of Finance, into the
Bank of China, into the various levels of the
Chinese economy and government that are dealing
with foreign countries. And as part of the reforms
at that time, China was looking towards opening
the country economically in other ways to the rest
of the world. And they needed some people who were
trained in the ways of doing business in these
other countries, because the Chinese do things in
a very different way, and they need to have some
understanding of how business is conducted in
other countries. And the school that these
students were attending, what was that called?
It's the University of International Business
and Economics. It's one of their best
universities. The universities in China are much
more specific than our universities here. in that
they focus on a single subject area. The one that I
was at focused on international business and
economics. There was another university in
Beijing that focused on Chinese business and
economics. Even within the different sciences,
there are different universities that are
devoted to biological sciences versus physics,
chemistry. Their universities really are more
comparable to a college within a university here
in the United States. But under the reforms,
they've been trying to somewhat broaden the scope
of the courses that are taught in their various
universities and institutions of higher
education. But they're in the process of
rebuilding their whole educational system,
which was disrupted, to put it mildly, during the
Cultural Revolution. Back in the 1960s. from 1966
to 1976. The university that I taught at was closed
down for three years in the early 70s, as were most
of the universities in China. So they're just now
trying to get their educational system back on
track. They lost a whole generation of educated
people. At the university level, you have
professors who are in the 50-plus age range, and
then There's a big gap. And then there's younger
professors who are in their maybe 20s or early 30s
who have gotten a college education in the last 10
years. And there's a big gap in between them. They
just don't receive a college education. They
don't have the trained people who can teach the
college classes. So they're rebuilding. Sounds
as if that would be across all disciplines. Yes,
that everything was closed down. Let me ask to
clarify, you were teaching at Texas A&M, and then
how did you get the position in China? Did you go
there singly? Yeah, I just saw a little ad that said
that there was a university in China that was
looking for someone to teach economics during the
coming academic year. And if you wanted more
information, here is an address. to write off to,
and it was in this strange sounding city called
Beijing. That was before we in America realized
that Peking was really an outdated
pronunciation, and Beijing is closer to the true
Chinese. I spent an hour in the map of the library
trying to find out where the city was, but it was a
small town out somewhere, and finally somebody
came in and said that they thought that that the
Chinese had changed the name from Peking to
Beijing. Finally, we did find that on one map. Come
to realize you're talking about the capital of the
country. The capital of the country, yes. Okay, so
you answered an ad and then left the United States
and spent a full nine months there. We were there
from the end of August in 85 to the first of July in
86. Okay, now you said we. Who was involved in that?
My entire family went with me. My wife, and our
three children. At the time, our daughter was in
the eighth grade, and our oldest son was in the
sixth grade, and our youngest son was two and a half
years old. So all five of you made the trip and lived
there together. All five of us lived that year in
Beijing, yeah. That must have been an experience.
So the friends you mentioned in 1989 being in
contact with before you made the trip in Beijing,
late may of 1989 were these people that you had
contacted or that you knew from your previous
visit these were people that i had known from our
previous visit and had come into contact with
since then in communications back and forth
division just a kind of off the wall question in
terms of how does the language how did how did you
deal with that both the first visit and then the
second I do not speak Chinese, and that was one of
the things that I wrote the university when I first
responded to that ad, but the university I taught
at, the students had six years of English before
they got there, because English is the language
that she used in her national business. The
Chinese even use English as their language in
business deals with the Soviet Union and the other
Eastern Bloc nations. The students at the
university where I taught their freshman and
sophomore year took more intensive study in
English. And as a matter of fact, my wife ended up
teaching a freshman English class. And they had
some other foreign experts there who taught
different courses in English. So the seniors and
graduate students that I was working with
understood English quite well and could make
themselves understood. language was not a
problem. Our two older children learned quite a
bit of Chinese while we were there. My wife and I
ended up spending most of our time helping some
Chinese work on improving their English, so we did
not take full advantage of the opportunity we had
of learning some Chinese. Again, when I went back
in 89, we had some interpreters at the conferences
we were at. And some of the Chinese who were making
presentations spoke English. It's, I guess,
typical around the world. We as Americans go
everywhere and expect everybody else to speak
English. And I really feel ashamed of myself and
our country in the sense that we have very few
people who are bilingual. We always depend on the
other people to speak our language. And I think
that we need to improve on that. You found that the
same when you traveled to Japan and so forth. In
Japan and in Europe, it's not unusual to run across
people who speak two, three, four languages
fluently. Okay. I'd like us to kind of go back then.
You flew from the United States into the airport in
Beijing. Yes. We stopped in Shanghai on the way,
but that's where we entered the country for
customs purposes and then on up to Beijing. Okay. I
understand that the airport is about 30
kilometers from the center of the city, or what
kind of a ride did you have in? I'm kind of curious,
when you got there and landed, what you were seeing
or keeping an eye out for as you headed towards
where the conference would be held. The airport in
Beijing is, in several situations,
intercontinental airport there in Houston, and
it's outside of town about 15, 20 miles on the
northeast side of town. Once I landed, a friend of
mine came and picked me up and took me to the hotel
where I was staying on the northeast side of
Beijing. So I was able to, on that ride in, both get
some information about what was going on in China
and in Beijing in particular, and able to see for
myself what was happening. Of course, one of the
things I was looking for was any evidence of troop
build-ups around Beijing, because in the weeks
prior to that, there had been some troop movement
into Beijing, and a number of times the troops had
tried to go into the capital, but had been stopped
by people coming up the streets. So these are some
of the things that I was looking for, and trying to,
just a general impression of what things had
changed since we had been there three years
before. I think you have a unique opportunity to
make that contrast, having been there earlier and
then coming back this other time. The friend that
you were with, what perspective was he coming
from? Another professor or student? This was a
Chinese friend, and he was trying to explain the
situation to me there. and felt quite comfortable
that things were peaceful and would remain so. He
was amazed at the response among the Chinese
people in general to the student demonstrations
in that in the past, and I know we were there in
85-86, people were very hesitant to to voice their
opinions, to let anybody else know how they really
felt about something. Because there have been
periods in the past, back in 1958, for example, Mao
Zedong decided that it would be all right for
people to criticize the government in a
constructive way. And this was going to be a change
in government policy, to allow people to make
comments that would be used then to help improve
the situation. After about a month and a half of
that, decided that this was not a good idea. And
retroactively, the people who had voiced their
opinions had been severely punished. So this had
happened a number of times. And the Chinese people
were well aware of that. So they were very hesitant
about voicing opinion on anything political. I
even ran into that problem in my classes when I was
teaching in 85-86. Even though it was politically
acceptable to talk about opening China to the West
and doing business with the West, the students
were hesitant to act too interested in the things
that I was talking about, because everyone in
China has a file. And that file follows you your
whole life. And if something that could in a later
time be construed to be something negative,
something potentially bad, then because the
government owns all the factories, they own all
the businesses, they assign you where to live,
they assign you where to work and that, that you can
be punished just through your work assignments
and that. So students were hesitant to ask
questions and seemed too interested in what we
were talking about because someone else might
inform on them. And if the government policy were
to change, that could be held against them. You
were very aware of this policy of the file
following the student from the earlier time.
Knowing that and then hearing about the
demonstrations for democracy, how did How did you
feel about that in terms of, well, how do you think
the students dealt with that, knowing the file was
following them? Well, I think the students who
were in Tiananmen Square and initiated the
demonstrations, they were well aware of the
severe punishments that they could expect to
receive from the government. And I think that most
of the students felt that perhaps that would be the
only thing that would be done to them, that the
government might send in some troops or some
secret police and beat them up and arrest them. But
no one really believed that the government would
use the brutal force that they did in putting down
the demonstration.
This had happened a number of times in the past. I
remember when I was watching, before I went over
there, I was watching the news coverage of what was
going on in Tiananmen Square. The news reporters
did not really have a very good understanding or a
feel for what was going on in China. They knew that
something different was happening. They knew
that something rather dramatic was happening.
But, for example, every morning the news
commentators would make the comment that the
students seemed to be very relieved that they'd
made it through another night and seemed to be much
more relaxed, that during the night they were much
more nervous. But the news commentators didn't
know why. Well, back in 1976, a similar but a much
smaller scale demonstration had taken place when
Zhou Enlai had died. And some students had
gathered in Tiananmen Square to mourn his death.
And after several days, the government decided
that they did not want the demonstrations going
on. So in the middle of the night, about 1 o'clock in
the morning, they sent some secret security
police into Tiananmen Square. And they arrested,
beat severely, and even shot some of the
demonstrators who were there. But cleaned up the
square real nice so that by the next morning when
everybody went to work, it looked like nothing had
happened. And it took four or five years for the
word of that to spread throughout China because
the government owns all the news media sources of
information. People find out about things by word
of mouth. So the students who were at Tiananmen
Square were well aware of what had happened in the
past, and that's why they were very concerned
about the nighttime. They figured if the
government was going to make their move, that they
were going to do that at night, but the news
commentators did not understand that. It must
have been a little frustrating to watch American
newscasters make their comments about
something, and like you say, they're not
understanding the background behind it, coming
from a lack of information or knowledge from being
inside China. Can we kind of go back to Tiananmen
Square in terms of when you came into Beijing in
1989, what was your first view or the first time you
saw these students in Tiananmen Square? The first
chance I got was on Wednesday of that week. The
students had put up the Goddess of Democracy
statute for Tuesday. tour group was going, or the
conference was going to a meeting near the square,
and so we drove by the square. So I had a chance to
view it on the bus from Chang'an Avenue, which is
that main street that runs east to west in Beijing.
And then later that afternoon, after our meetings
were finished, I went down to Tiananmen Square,
walked around in the square for an hour, and took
quite a few pictures and was just overwhelmed by
the
people who were involved in the demonstration in
that it was a much broader demonstration than just
the students. The students were the Catholics.
And again, our news media focused on the students.
But the vast majority of the people who, and when I
say the vast majority, we're talking about on a
couple of occasions, there were millions of
people who were out in the streets demonstrating
to support the students. Of all age groups, I'm
saying. These were people of all age groups. These
were people from all levels of society within
Beijing, from workers in the factories to people
in the ministries. May I ask how you would make that
determination that these were workers or that
these were people of different economic levels?
In some cases by the banners and that that they had
and you can also tell by the way that a lot of the
people dressed and the age of course that's you
could see people who were very, very young and also
people who were very old in their fifties and
sixties. So you had a broad spectrum of society.
Then on this Wednesday afternoon that you're
talking about, you were on foot walking through
the square? Yes, I went on foot down there and was
walking through the square and taking Pictures,
not only of the statue, but of the students' living
conditions there, the tents, the banners and
that, the signs that they had up, so that when I
could get back, I could have some of my friends
translate for me what these were. One of them was a
picture of Joy Lai, who many of the Chinese feel
helped moderate the excesses of Mao during the
Cultural Revolution. If it wasn't for him, things
would have been much worse. He was a person that
many Chinese feel really had the good of the
Chinese people in general at heart. And part of the
irony of this whole situation is that Li Peng, one
of the hardliners and I think one of the major
decision makers sending the troops into
Tiananmen Square was an adopted son of Zhou Enlai
and I had interpreted when I got back one of the this
sign had Zhou Enlai's picture and was saying as if
Zhou Enlai was speaking to Li Peng saying that he
was very disappointed the way Li Peng had turned
out and the things that he had been doing And one of
the other sides was a little bit more pointed in its
criticism of Li Peng, that had a caricature of Li
Peng, but underneath it said that the PLA, the
People's Liberation Army, ought to use Li Peng for
their target practice. You had students here at
A&M who were able to translate those for you? Yes,
there are students here at A&M and a number of the
other universities here in Texas that are from
China. As a matter of fact, I think in the U.S. now
there's about 40,000 students from mainland
China, so there are quite a few. I think that was
neat that you had your camera there to take some
pictures. You've shared one particular picture
with me that we're looking at right now of the
goddess of democracy. Can you tell me what got you
to take this particular picture? Well, there
were... One thing that I saw that was very
different from when we were there before was the
fact that a lot of the Chinese, particularly the
younger generation, now had cameras, Japanese
modern cameras. When we were there, the few people
who had cameras were the old box-type cameras that
you looked in from the top. Yes. And as a part of this
new spirit of openness, there were, quite a few
people who, I said, were having their friends take
pictures of themselves with the guys from
Democracy in the background. And there was one
young lady in particular who had gotten all
dressed up. And they had some barrels that are out
there in the square that were spread around. And
she got up on one of those. So she was a little bit
above the rest of the crowd. and was flashing the V
symbol for victory or peace in front of the Goddess
of Democracy. To me, it just kind of captured the
whole emotion of the movement. Of course, the
students who have those pictures of themselves
taken in front of the Gaza Democracy, they have to
guard those very carefully because the
government is trying to get a hold of those to
identify people who participated in the
demonstration. They're even using the footage
that was shown on American TV to try to identify
people. So I'm sure that a lot of the people had
their pictures taken. They're very proud of those
pictures, and hopefully they They've hidden away
somewhere where no one would be able to find them,
but be able to pull them out at a later date to show
that they participated in the demonstrations and
that they were down in the square. In effect,
they're proof that they were there, but also a
testimony could be used against them by the
government, you're saying. Can you share with us
any, this young lady has on a very colorful outfit.
I think in one of the articles you wrote, you
commented about how clothing has changed a great
deal. Was that typical of these students? This was
one of the things that I noticed. When we were
there, the young people and the university
students in particular, they were rather fashion
conscious and wanted more western dress and more
colorful things. had a very limited budget and
there wasn't a whole lot of foreign clothing or
even Chinese made but styled more towards west was
available in 85-86. But in returning this time,
when we're back there in 85-86, still a large
number of people were wearing the blue and green
Mao coats with slacks to match and a blue or green
Mao hat. When I went back in 89, there were much
fewer people. But the only people that were still
wearing that clothes were some of the older
people. Younger people, students, but also,
again, workers, and even people in their mid-30s
and 40s were wearing, if not outright colorful
things, at least they were wearing white shirts,
slacks, more Western type of clothing. So this was
one of the major changes that I saw since we'd been
there. This particular girl almost has on a
sleeveless dress. Could you share just a little
bit about what the weather was like? Well, in the
summertime, Beijing is very hot. It's much like
Houston. It's very hot and very humid. So in the
summertime, the Chinese typically wear things
that are very lightweight because in the
buildings, there is no air conditioning. so you
have to dress light. Conversely, in the
wintertime, people literally wear eight, ten
layers of clothes because there's little or no
heat in the buildings, and the way you keep warm is
through your layers of clothes. So, as I said, in
the summer, it was warm. It was in the mid-'80s,
maybe lower-'90s. Beijing, as is true of a lot of
developing nations, They do not have the
sophistication of ideas about pollution control
and things like that. Most of their electricity
that comes from burning coal. So they're burning
coal all year round. So you have a fine coal dust
that's in the air all the time. It kind of makes the
sky a gray. You very seldom see a clear blue sky.
Even though there was more automobile and bus
traffic this time than there was in 85, 86, there's
still not anywhere near the automobile traffic
that there is in Western nations. In China mainly
because people cannot own a car themselves. Some
of the factories and that, they're the ones that
have the cars, and most of the people still get
around on bicycles. And Beijing is... almost
surrounded by mountains, so you have all this
stuff gets trapped in there, so the sky quite often
is just kind of a chalky gray color. These students
were out in this square, some of them at least, for
six or seven weeks previous to the final week here.
What else did you observe as you were walking
through the...